Skip to main content Мы всегда на связи AboutМедуза по-русски The Real Russia, Today RU I’m with you, Meduza news Russia’s war against Ukraine Live coverage of Moscow’s full-scale invasion Прямой эфир 10:16 pm, February 26, 2022 Since February 24, Meduza has been tracking major developments in Ukraine, Russia, and around the world, following President Putin’s decision to launch a full-scale invasion of Ukraine. For coverage of the first three days of the war, see Meduza’s original live reporting hereand here. Below, you will find the latest major developments, updated every few hours. 5 minutes ago Vladimir Astapkovich / Pool / TASS The official broadcast of the concert marking the anniversary of Russia’s annexation of Ukraine at Moscow’s Luzhniki stadium was interrupted during Vladimir Putin’s speech. Putin was in the middle of a sentence about the birthday of one of Russia’s military leaders when the broadcast cut off. When it returned, the screen showed earlier footage of a singer performing a patriot song. Before being interrupted, Putin said that Russia had “done quite a lot to improve Crimea and Sevastopol,” and that Russia had had to pull them out of the sorry state Ukraine had left them in. He also said that the goal of the “special military operation” in Ukraine is to “rid people of genocide,” quoting the Gospel of John: “There is no greater love than to lay down one’s life for one’s friends.” According to a correspondent from Kommersant who was there, the event ended after Putin finished his speech. Several minutes after the interruption, Putin’s speech was broadcast again, this time in its entirety. Presidential Press Secretary Dmitry Peskov said that the interruption was due to a “technical error on the server.” 2 hours ago MEDUZA’S LATEST INTERVIEW ‘They don’t know Ukraine’ Zelensky advisor Mykhailo Podolyak on Kyiv’s ‘cautious optimism’ about the negotiations with Russia 16 hours ago MEDUZA’S LATEST INTERVIEW ‘They don’t know Ukraine’ Zelensky advisor Mykhailo Podolyak on Kyiv’s ‘cautious optimism’ about the negotiations with Russia 16 hours ago 3 hours ago Latest major developments, 2:50 p.m., Moscow time (7:50 a.m., EST) Very normal country: Rallies and events are being held throughout Russia today to celebrate the anniversary of the “reunification” of Crimea. The government is sponsoring a show in Moscow’s Luzhniki Stadium, which can hold over 80,000 people. In Sevastopol, the day began with a ride by the Night Wolves, a motorcycle gang that has actively supported Putin and participated in his events for years. An awkward week for Germany: In a conversation with German Chancellor Olaf Scholz on Friday, Vladimir Putin complained that Ukrainian representatives have been making “unrealistic proposals” and trying to “draw out the negotiation process,” while Russia is “ready to work faster” to come to an agreement. This was despite reports earlier in the week that significant progress was being reached between the two countries. For his part, Scholz told Putin a ceasefire is necessary and that the humanitarian situation needs to be improved. In a speech to Germany’s parliament earlier this week, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky accused the country of helping Russia “build a new wall” by purchasing Russian petroleum while simultaneously declining Ukraine’s request to join the EU. How low can they go: State Duma deputies from Russia’s ruling party, United Russia, have drafted amendments to the Russian Criminal Code and Code of Administrative Offenses that would further limit what information can be spread about Russia’s activities abroad. “We’re proposing criminal charges for the spread of fake news (public dissemination of information known to be false) not only about the army, but also about any other state agencies working abroad,” said Deputy Alexander Khinshtein. The amendment may be considered by the State Duma’s information policy committee as early as next week. Not out of the woods: According to Ukrainian human rights officer Lyudmila Denisova, 130 people have been rescued from the bomb shelter under the Mariupol theater that was bombed by Russian forces on Wednesday, but over 1300 are still stuck below the wreckage. Ukrainian authorities have reported that the lack of remaining social services in the city due to Russia’s continuous shelling is hindering rescue efforts. The fight against inflation: Russia’s Central Bank kept its interest rate at 20% on Friday, saying the high rate had “helped sustain financial stability.” The rate was at 9.5% until late Friday, when the bank raised it to record levels to protect the economy from inflation triggered by international sanctions. According to a statement, the bank is aiming for an inflation rate of 4% by 2024. Death in the capital: 222 people have died in Kyiv since the war in Ukraine began, according to the authorities there. In addition, 889 people have been injured, 241 of whom were civilians, including 18 children, three ambulance drivers, and one EMT. 55 buildings have been damaged, including 36 residential buildings, six schools, and four kindergartens. 4 hours ago the party line 'The traitors will disappear on their own' Dmitry Peskov on the coming 'purification of Russian society' 4 hours ago the party line 'The traitors will disappear on their own' Dmitry Peskov on the coming 'purification of Russian society' 4 hours ago 4 hours ago Putin cracks down ‘The purification of society will only strengthen the country’ Meduza’s brief retelling of Putin’s darkest speech yet 5 hours ago Putin cracks down ‘The purification of society will only strengthen the country’ Meduza’s brief retelling of Putin’s darkest speech yet 5 hours ago 8 hours ago the information war What's going on in Russian-occupied Ukraine? Meduza gets the facts. 8 hours ago the information war What's going on in Russian-occupied Ukraine? Meduza gets the facts. 8 hours ago 11 hours ago On March 13, reports appeared on Telegram that Chechen leader Ramzan Kadyrov had traveled to Kyiv to support the Chechen troops fighting there. Kadyrov himself corroborated the claim. Reporters from Ukrayinska Pravda (Ukrainian Truth) wanted to find out whether it was true. Sources from Ukraine’s intelligence services told the journalists that Kadyrov has two phone numbers, and that neither device had been connected to Ukrainian cell towers for at least a week. The journalists also wrote directly to Kadyrov on Telegram: they pretended to be correspondents from RIA Novosti and asked Kadyrov to click on a link to see a draft of an article they planned to publish about his “heroic victory.” Ukrainska Pravda The link they sent was generated “using a public online service” that reveals the whereabouts of any device that opens it. It confirmed Kadyrov’s location: Grozny, the Chechen capital. Ukrainska Pravda 11 hours ago Kharkiv's Barabashova Market, the largest market in Ukraine, burning on Thursday 12 hours ago Major developments on March 17, the 22nd day of Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine Good news from the ruins: Many of the civilians who were hiding in the basement of a Mariupol theater that was bombed by Russia have survived, according to local officials. Before the bombing, Ukrainians had painted the word “children” in large letters next to the building to warn Russian planes to spare it, apparently to no avail; luckily, the theater's basement stayed intact. Hundreds of people had been hiding in the theater for days, with little food and no heat aside from fires they made by burning the wood from auditorium seats. It is unclear how many people were killed by the bombing, and the Ukrainian authorities have reported that the lack of remaining social services in the city due to Russia’s continuous shelling is making rescue efforts difficult. Default averted — or at least deferred: Russia made at least some of its debt payments that were due on Wednesday, indicating it might have avoided default for now. The Russian authorities previously said they may be forced to pay the debts in rubles rather than dollars, the currency in which the debts were issued, but evidently they found enough dollars in time for the payment. A dangerous time to be Ukrainian: Russian law enforcement officers have been ordered to thoroughly investigate all Ukrainian citizens in Moscow, according to the independent monitoring group OVD-Info. According to one source the group spoke with, he and several other Ukrainian citizens were arrested in Moscow after trying to use their passports to board a bus to Riga. The following morning, they were charged with disorderly conduct and sentenced to 5-10 days in administrative detention. Reaching the limit: The Czech authorities have warned that the country is unable to accept any more Ukrainian refugees. “We need to understand that we’re reaching the limit of what we can take in without major problems,” said Prime Minister Petr Fiala. According to him, the Czech Republic has taken in more than 270 thousand Ukrainians who were forced to flee their homes due to the war. According to the UN, more than 3 million people have now left Ukraine as refugees. The Terminator weighs in: In a new, emotional nine-minute video (that, at the time of this writing, has 15.5 million views on Twitter and more than half a million views on Telegram), Arnold Schwarzeneggar describes his “love for the Russian people” and argues that the Kremlin is lying to the public about its war of aggression in Ukraine. Criminal Code 207.3 enforcement begins: Officials in Tomsk continue to charge local bloggers with the new felony offense of “spreading disinformation about Russia’s armed forces.” The authorities have even opened a criminal case against Marina Novikova, a 63-year-old woman in the city of Seversk who has been sharing antiwar views on her Telegram channel, which had just 170 subscribers when the police decided to intervene. If convicted, she could go to prison for up to three years Russia’s accomplice: The Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers has suspended relations with Belarus in response to the country’s “active participation in Russia’s aggression against Ukraine,” according to Iceland’s permanent representative in the Council. This comes just days after Russia was formally excluded from the Council. Not going anywhere: Marina Ovsyannikova, the state television network employee who made global headlines on Monday when she ran onstage during an evening news program with an anti-war sign, has officially quit her job at the network. Nonetheless, she rejected a French asylum offer, calling herself a “patriot,” and her 17-year-old son an even bigger patriot. Ovsyannikova said her son has reproached her for “destroying the lives of everyone in the family,” but she maintained that she does not regret “calling the war a war.” a day ago A man in Kyiv mourns his mother, weeping over her body. March 17, 2022. Thomas Peter / Reuters / Scanpix / LETA a day ago Read more from Meduza NO TO WAR A new symbol of Russia’s anti-war movement Meduza explains the origins of the white-blue-white flag. 2 days ago NO TO WAR A new symbol of Russia’s anti-war movement Meduza explains the origins of the white-blue-white flag. 2 days ago NAVALNY IN COURT ‘This will lead to our country’s collapse’ Alexey Navalny's address to the Russian public as the state seeks new charges against him. 2 days ago NAVALNY IN COURT ‘This will lead to our country’s collapse’ Alexey Navalny's address to the Russian public as the state seeks new charges against him. 2 days ago STATE TV PROTEST ‘Everyone knows they’re lying’ How Marina Ovsyannikova rebelled against Russian state television 2 days ago STATE TV PROTEST ‘Everyone knows they’re lying’ How Marina Ovsyannikova rebelled against Russian state television 2 days ago a day ago Exclusive ‘Z’ How Russia transformed a letter of the Latin alphabet into the official (and ominous) symbol of its invasion of Ukraine 2 days ago Exclusive ‘Z’ How Russia transformed a letter of the Latin alphabet into the official (and ominous) symbol of its invasion of Ukraine 2 days ago a day ago Major developments on March 16, the 21st day of Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine Mr. Zelensky goes to Washington: President Volodymyr Zelensky addressed the U.S. Congress, making another plea for a no-fly zone over Ukraine, though he also petitioned Washington for additional air defense and aviation weaponry. In his speech, Zelensky reminded his American counterparts about the bombings of Pearl Harbor and 9/11, before screening a brief video that depicted Ukrainian civilians injured and killed by Russian airstrikes. President Biden still refuses to pursue a no-fly zone in Ukraine, warning that it would lead to a catastrophic war directly with Russia, but his administration has endorsed sending Kyiv another 800 anti-aircraft systems, 9,000 anti-armor systems, and 7,000 small arms like shotguns and grenade launchers, as well as drones and other military equipment. Biden later told reporters that he considers Putin to be a “war criminal” (the Kremlin has since called this remark “unacceptable and unforgivable”). Civilians in the crosshairs: Officials in the besieged city of Mariupol say the Russian military bombed a theater where more than 1,000 civilians were sheltering. Moscow has denied any daytime airstrikes in the area, claiming that the Azov Battalion carried out the attack (the Russian military similarly blamed the Azov Battalion for hijacking a maternity ward that Moscow destroyed earlier in the siege). Less than a week before the attack against the theater, members of the Azov group published a video from the theater in Mariupol showing civilians in the building’s basement. Additionally, satellite footage from before the bombing showed the word “children” painted on the ground outside the building — a warning to Russian aircraft that was apparently ignored. Putin declares war on ‘fifth-columnists’: At a virtual cabinet meeting to discuss economic support to regions across Russia, Vladimir Putin made a nationally broadcast speech where he repeated dubious claims about Moscow’s pretexts for invading Ukraine, including Kyiv’s alleged “genocide” against ethnic Russians living in the Donbas and a supposed American-led bioweapons program developed in cities near the Russian border. The president also condemned his domestic political critics as “scum and traitors,” arguing that they should be removed from society in an act of “natural and necessary self-purification.” Russia’s thought police: A court in Tomsk convicted a man of “discrediting” Russia’s armed forces by “silently expressing support” while watching several activists picket against the war in Ukraine. The judge decided that the defendant was with the activists and fined him 45,000 rubles ($465). No more EHCR litigation: Russia formally withdrew from the Council of Europe on Wednesday, and the European Court of Human Rights promptly suspended its review of all complaints filed against the Russian government. Politicians like former President Dmitry Medvedev and members of the right-wing political party LDPR have argued previously that Russia should reinstate the death penalty. The real honor roll: The Plekhanov Russian University of Economics expelled two students, Antonina Begacheva and Polina Lysenko, for sharing antiwar stories on Instagram. “You’ve got to be more careful on social media,” said the dean’s office. Separately, St. Petersburg State University threatened to expel journalist Nika Samsusik after police officers unlawfully arrested her while she was reporting from an anti-war protest. 2 days ago The European Court of Human Rights has suspended its review of all complaints against the Russian Federation. 2 days ago A Russian airstrike has destroyed the Donetsk Regional Theater of Drama in Mariupol. Local officials say more than 1,000 civilians were sheltering in the building’s basement at the time of the attack. The number of casualties is still unknown at this moment. Update: The Russian military denies any strikes against ground targets in Mariupol during the daytime on March 16. Moscow has accused the Ukrainian Azov Battalion of bombing the theater — an allegation the Ukrainian government dismisses as nonsense. 2 days ago Latest major developments, 7:20 p.m., Moscow time (12:20 p.m., EST) Back in business: The Ukrainian and Moldovan electricity grids have been linked to the EU grid. While this process would ordinarily have taken a year, according to EU energy commissioner Kadri Simson, it was achieved in just two weeks. The two countries’ grids were previously connected to the Russian grid and had been since the Soviet Union, although Ukraine had long planned to link its grid to the EU’s in 2023. Protect our skies: Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky addressed the U.S. Congress by video call on Wednesday. In an emotional plea for NATO and the U.S. to implement a no-fly zone over Ukraine, Zelensky invoked both the 9/11 attacks and the attack on Pearl Harbor, as well as showing graphic images of the effects of Russia’s invasion. Though NATO and the U.S. have repeatedly stated that a no-fly zone is not feasible, Zelensky was adamant: “Russia has turned the Ukrainian sky into a source of death for thousands of people.” Another site down: The BBC website has been blocked in Russia. According to a foreign ministry spokesperson, the move is "just the beginning of response actions to an information war unleashed by the West.” Negotiations continue: Both Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky and Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov spoke optimistically about the prospect of reaching an agreement after talks on Wednesday. Russia is reportedly seeking for Ukraine to agree to a geopolitically “neutral status,” like that of Austria or Sweden, while Ukraine is still demanding the withdrawal of Russian troops. In his own world: Vladimir Putin gave a falsehood-laden televised speech on Wednesday in which he claimed that Russia's “special military operation” was “going according to plan.” He acknowledged Western sanctions’ negative effects on the Russian economy more than he has in the past, but assured listeners that the country has the tools to withstand them. He also claimed that invading Ukraine was necessary because “the pro-Nazi regime in Kyiv” was close to obtaining weapons of mass destruction. 2 days ago Major developments on March 15, the 20th day of Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine The price of protest: Marina Ovsyannikova, the state television network employee who made global headlines on Monday when she ran onstage during an evening news program with an anti-war sign, reported being interrogated by law enforcement for 14 hours and denied legal counsel. A judge in Moscow charged Ovsyannikova with a misdemeanor and fined her 30,000 rubles (about $280) for a prerecorded video message released after her on-air protest, though no criminal case has been opened in response to the protest itself. A number of other state media employees have reportedly left their jobs since Ovsyannikova’s protest on Monday. Walking the walk: Three European prime ministers traveled to Kyiv to meet with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky and show their support for Ukraine as Russian forces close in on the city. After the meeting, Polish Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki called for a “peace mission” on Ukrainian territory led by NATO or a “wider international structure.” The official death toll: The UN reported that there have been 691 confirmed civilian deaths, including 48 children, since Russia invaded Ukraine on February 24, while at least 1,143 civilians have been injured. The agency acknowledged that the true numbers are likely much higher; Ukrainian authorities have reported at least 2,400 civilian deaths in Mariupol alone. No more Russian vacations for Biden: Russia passed sanctions against a number of high-ranking US officials, including President Joe Biden. Meanwhile, the EU passed its fourth round of sanctions against Russia. The latest package from Europe targets Russia's energy sectors, including the companies Rosneft, Transneft, and Gazprom Neft, as well as business leaders like oligarch Roman Abramovich and Pervyi Kanal head Konstantin Ernst. More civilians escape Mariupol: An estimated 20,000 civilians managed to flee Mariupol through humanitarian corridors on Tuesday, the city’s largest one-day evacuation yet. Meanwhile, Russian troops reportedly continued firing on civilian targets in the city, in addition to taking about 400 civilians hostage in the city’s largest hospital to prevent Ukrainian forces from targeting the building. You can’t fire me — because I quit: Russia officially exited the Council of Europe, likely in anticipation of being expelled in the coming days for its invasion of Ukraine. The move opens the door for Moscow to remove the moratorium on the death penalty — a requirement for membership in the Council — that it has observed since 1996 despite capital punishment’s inclusion in Russia law. Russian citizens will no longer be able to appeal to the European Court of Human Rights against the Russian government. Time to pay up: Wednesday is the deadline for the Russian government to pay about $117 million in U.S. dollars to creditors, putting Moscow in a pickle as many of its international currency reserves are currently inaccessible due to sanctions. The government has insisted the debts will be paid in full — though possibly in rubles instead of dollars — but experts say Russia is still hurtling towards default. 3 days ago Ovsyannikova is fined A judge in Moscow has fined Marina Ovsyannikova 30,000 rubles (about $280) for inciting protests against Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in a prerecorded message released after she ran onto the stage of a live TV broadcast with an anti-war sign. 3 days ago Russia officially withdraws from the Council of Europe Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov sent a letter to the organization’s general secretary formally announcing Russia’s exit from the group. 3 days ago Major developments on March 14, the 19th day of Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine The woman who dared: During a live broadcast of the Monday evening news on the state television network Pervyi Kanal, a woman ran on stage carrying an anti-war sign, shouting, “No to war! Stop the war!” She was later identified as Marina Ovsyannikova, an employee at the station. Police promptly arrested her and escorted her to an undisclosed location. Defense attorneys seeking to offer their legal counsel were unable to find her all night. According to unofficial reports, Ovsyannikova will face misdemeanor charges for her protest. She also pre-recorded a video statement wherein she denounced the “criminal” war against Ukraine and blamed Vladimir Putin for its “fratricidal” bloodshed. Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky later thanked Ovsyannikova directly in a video shared on social media for her stand against disinformation. A deadly explosion in Donetsk: A rocket exploded in central Donetsk killing 20 people and injuring another 28, according to Russia’s Defense Ministry, which identified the weapon as an OTR-21 Tochka tactical ballistic missile, allegedly fired from territory under the Ukrainian state’s control. Officials in Kyiv, however, say, “This was definitely a Russian missile or some other ammunition.” Trouble leaving Mariupol: Roughly 150 vehicles carrying civilians departed Mariupol on Monday. BBC Russia reported that this was the first time since the city’s encirclement that residents managed to use “humanitarian corridors” to escape. Mariupol’s mayor later reported, however, that the evacuees got no farther than the Russian-occupied city of Berdiansk (about 50 miles southwest). Going after the oil, sorta: The European Union approved a fourth package of “restrictive measures” against Russia in response to Moscow’s attacks against schools, apartment buildings, and hospitals in Ukraine. Reuters reported that EU states will also adopt new sanctions against the oil majors Rosneft, Transneft, and Gazprom Neft, but European purchases of Russian oil will continue. Another high-profile official speaks out: Arkady Dvorkovich, the president of the World Chess Federation and a former Russian deputy prime minister, publicly criticized the invasion of Ukraine, calling the war “the worst thing you can face in life” and saying that he keeps Ukraine’s civilians in his thoughts. Disloyal businesses: Lawmakers from the nation’s ruling political party have proposed legislation that would make it a felony to enforce Western sanctions inside Russia. The law would penalize Russian companies that refuse to work with sanctioned banks and other businesses under the pretext that they would risk becoming sanctioned themselves. “Obeying foreign sanctions within [Russia] constitutes indirect support [of the sanctions]. There’s no other word for this but betrayal,” said Andrey Turchak, a senior member of United Russia. The politics of live music: Police departments in Russia have issued instructions to concert promoters and venue hosts not to invite certain Ukrainian musicians or artists with known anti-war views, according to the investigative news outlet Agentstvo. Other musicians have reportedly been pressured to sign contracts promising not to discuss Russia’s “special military operation” in Ukraine while on stage. Separately, economic sanctions and corporate withdrawals have created copyright issues with new releases from Western artists that will make most of this music unavailable to Russia’s two streaming giants, Yandex Music and VK Music. Good times for VK: Following Russia’s decision to block Meta services like Facebook and Instagram, the Russian social network Vkontakte reported its highest ever daily traffic, with a record 50 million users visiting the website in a single day. Headquartered in Russia, Vkontakte operates in compliance with Russian Internet controls and has already blocked the pages of several independent news outlets, including Meduza’s page. On Monday, Russia’s federal censor blocked the popular news and memes website TJournal. 4 days ago Breaking news Russian state TV editor interrupts live news broadcast with anti-war message 4 days ago Life in Moscow’s orbit Behold Russia’s ‘liberation’ Invading forces in Ukraine spent weeks conquering Volnovakha, inflicting damage so severe that the town no longer exists 4 days ago Life in Moscow’s orbit Behold Russia’s ‘liberation’ Invading forces in Ukraine spent weeks conquering Volnovakha, inflicting damage so severe that the town no longer exists 4 days ago 4 days ago Life in Russia “We’re on the Titanic, and it’s just hit the iceberg” Meduza’s Russian readers explain why they’re not leaving the country. 4 days ago Life in Russia “We’re on the Titanic, and it’s just hit the iceberg” Meduza’s Russian readers explain why they’re not leaving the country. 4 days ago 4 days ago Latest major developments, 4:15 p.m., Moscow time (9:15 a.m., EST) Rewriting last month: Russian Presidential Press Secretary Dmitry Peskov claimed that at the beginning of the war in Ukraine, Vladimir Putin “instructed the Defense Ministry to refrain from immediately storming large cities, including Kyiv.” According to Peskov, this was because “armed nationalist formations were setting up firing points and placing heavy military equipment right in residential areas.” Now, however, “the Defense Ministry, while maintaining maximum security for the civilian population, is not ruling out the possibility of taking full control of large population centers, which already are practically completely surrounded, with the exception of humanitarian evacuation zones.” We’ll take those, too: Russian President Vladimir Putin signed a law allowing foreign planes leased to Russia-based airlines to be registered as the airlines’ property. The law also allows Russian airworthiness certificates to be issued to foreign aircraft. Russia’s need for this law arose after the EU banned leasing aircraft to Russian airlines; European planes that were leased to Russian companies were arrested abroad, leading to the almost complete cessation of flights from Russian Airlines outside of Russia’s borders. However, almost half of commercial planes leased to Russia were registered in Bermuda. Since March 13, when the Bermuda authorities suspended these planes’ airworthiness certificates, the companies have been flying them illegally. Mariupol’s death toll continues to climb: According to the Ukrainian authorities, more than 2,500 people have died in Mariupol, which has been under siege by the Russian army for over two weeks. Oleksiy Arestovych, a Ukrainian presidential, said that “the Russians are wiping out the city” with artillery. Civilians there have run out of food, water, and power, and a convoy of humanitarian aid that was set to reach the city on Sunday has still not arrived. Let him go: Calls are growing for Russian troops to release Ukrainian journalist Oleg Baturin, who disappeared in the Kherson region on Saturday evening. He is believed to have gone to meet a friend at a bus station near his house in Kakhova, but was not seen again. Russian soldiers were spotted near the bus station soon after Baturin’s planned meeting time. Khakova is currently not occupied by Russian forces, but the neighboring town of Nova Kakhovka is. Here’s hoping this goes somewhere: Negotiations between Ukraine and Russia are currently underway. The Ukrainian side reported progress this weekend, although Russia’s shelling of an apartment building in Kyiv on Monday morning could put a wrench in things. A ceasefire is one of the main goals of today’s talks; past negotiations have focused on the establishment of humanitarian aid and evacuation routes, with limited success. Pfizer steps back: Pfizer announced its divestment from the Russian market. According to a statement from the company, it will continue providing medications to Russian citizens, but will donate all profits to “causes that provide direct humanitarian support to the people of Ukraine.” The company will also stop conducting clinical trials in Russia. 4 days ago The Siege of Mariupol ‘They bury their neighbors wherever they can’ A Ukrainian journalist describes life under Russian siege in Mariupol. 4 days ago The Siege of Mariupol ‘They bury their neighbors wherever they can’ A Ukrainian journalist describes life under Russian siege in Mariupol. 4 days ago 4 days ago Latest major developments, 12:25 p.m., Moscow time (5:25 a.m., EST) Two if by sea: Russian naval forces have blockaded Ukraine’s Black Sea ports, cutting the country off from international maritime trade, according to the UK’s Defense Ministry. “Russian naval forces are also continuing to conduct missile strikes against targets throughout Ukraine,” said the statement. Mother and baby killed by Russian shelling: A pregnant woman who was injured in the bombing of a Mariupol maternity ward has died. Images of the woman being carried on a stretcher quickly spread around the world after the bombing on March 9. The woman’s death was preceded by that of her baby. A different woman, Mariana Vishegirskaya, whom the Russian authorities accused of colluding with Ukrainian “Nazis” to fake images and footage of the bombing, was also in the hospital’s maternity ward when it was bombed, but has survived and given birth to her baby. A glimmer of hope for some: The Ukrainian authorities announced that they managed to come to an agreement with Russia to establish humanitarian corridors and allow civilians to evacuate on March 14. The plan is to create six corridors in the Kyiv region and three in the Luhansk region. Ukraine also announced they expect an humanitarian assistance convoy containing 100 tons of cargo for civilians to reach Mariupol today. Encircled by Russian troops, Mariupol residents currently lack water, food, medicine, and electricity. Instagram blocked: According to the blockage monitoring service GlobalCheck, Instagram’s accessibility on Russian territory is 0% as of March 14. Roskomnadzor, Russia’s censorship agency, began blocking the platform on March 13, despite previously promising to give users access until midnight on March 14 to allow them to transfer their content. The agency claimed the blockage is a necessary response to the network’s advocacy of “anti-Russian genocide” (referring to but not explaining Meta’s recent policy to allow some incitements to violence against Russian invasion forces in Ukraine). Sanctions from Down Under: The Australian government has announced new sanctions against 33 Russian business owners and their families. The list includes Chelsea Football Club owner Roman Abramovich, Gazprom CEO Alexey Miller, Rossiya Chairman Dmitry Lebedev, Rostec Chair Sergey Chemezov, Transneft CEO Nikolai Tokarev, VEB.RF Chairman Igor Shuvalov, and RDIF CEO Kirill Dmitriev. 4 days ago The families divided by the war ‘The TV is winning’ Many Ukrainians now share a common experience: their relatives in Russia refuse to believe their accounts of the war. 4 days ago The families divided by the war ‘The TV is winning’ Many Ukrainians now share a common experience: their relatives in Russia refuse to believe their accounts of the war. 4 days ago 4 days ago Russians take selfies in front of the McDonald’s on Moscow’s Pushkin Square — minutes before it closes for good. It’s this same restaurant that made history in 1990, when it became the first McDonald’s to open in the USSR, ushering in a new era of Western dining options. 4 days ago Latest major developments, 6:20 a.m., Moscow time (11:20 p.m., EST) Making some headway: Ukrainian presidential adviser Mykhailo Podolyak gave a notably optimistic assessment of Sunday’s negotiations between Russia and Ukraine. “We will not concede in principle on any positions. Russia now understands this. Russia is already beginning to talk constructively,” he said in a video. Talks will resume by video call on Monday. That’s ours now: The Wall Street Journal reported that Russia’s Attorney General’s Office threatened to arrest local leaders of Western companies for criticizing the Russian authorities. The agency also threatened to seize all assets of companies that decided to withdraw from the Russian market, according to anonymous sources who spoke to the Journal. Russia’s Economic Development Ministry has already drafted a bill that would provide a pathway to nationalize for seized foreign property. Kadyrov takes a trip: Chechen leader Ramzan Kadyrov claimed to have traveled to Ukraine to meet with Chechen troops. A video published on Telegram by the Chechen state television channel Grozny shows Kadyrov meeting with Chechen troops, though whether the video was actually filmed in Ukraine is unclear. It is known, however, that Chechen forces are in Ukraine; residents of villages near Kyiv have reported being forced out of their homes by Chechen soldiers. They keep on coming: More than 850 people were arrested for participating in anti-war protests throughout Russia on Sunday. According to the independent monitoring group OVD-Info, many of the protesters’ phones were confiscated, while police forced a number of bystanders to show their messages and saved photos — presumably to prove they hadn’t filmed the arrests. No relief: A humanitarian aid convoy intended for Mariupol residents failed to reach the city on Sunday. The convoy is reportedly stuck in Berdyansk, a town about 50 miles away. According to the city administration, over 2,000 Mariupol residents have died since Russia invaded Ukraine on February 24. Those who survive face a lack of water, food, medicine, and electricity, as well as constant Russian shelling. That was a close one: The power is back on at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant, Ukrainian Energy Minister Herman Halushchenko said on Sunday. The plant had been relying on an emergency diesel generator since last Wednesday, when Russian troops took control of the facility and it lost access to its main power source. According to Halushchenko, “heroes” from Ukraine’s national power grid company were responsible for restoring the connection. The plant operators, who usually rotate in and out of the plant frequently for safety reasons, have been working on site under Russian control for over three weeks. 5 days ago read more ‘People from my country came to kill me’ Every year, thousands of Russians move to Ukraine. Putin’s invasion has turned their lives upside down. 5 days ago read more ‘People from my country came to kill me’ Every year, thousands of Russians move to Ukraine. Putin’s invasion has turned their lives upside down. 5 days ago About Code of conduct Advertise Privacy notes Cookies Facebook Twitter Instagram RSS © 2022 Meduza. All rights reserved 