Skip to main content Мы всегда на связи AboutМедуза по-русски The Real Russia, Today RU I’m with you, Meduza news Russia’s war against UkraineLive coverage of Moscow’s full-scale invasion Broadcasting now meduza Definitely not ‘staged’False allegations about the maternity hospital airstrike in Mariupol, debunked an hour ago meduza Has Russia’s invasion stalled?Meduza tackles one of the biggest questions in Ukraine as the war enters its third week 18 hours ago stories Incriminating InstagramThe Russian authorities want to outlaw Meta as ‘extremist’. What does this mean for social media users in Russia? a day ago stories From bad intel to worsePutin reportedly turns on FSB agency that botched Russia’s Ukraine prep a day ago stories ‘A way to let my friends know I’m still alive’Vera Lytovchenko, a professional violinist, keeps playing for her neighbors — even as Russian bombs fall outside. a day ago stories Why did Putin destroy Russia's independent media?The Russian authorities explain. a day ago news ‘The war photos are fake — but the bioweapons are real’15 days into its invasion of Ukraine, Russia's information war continues at full throttle. 2 days ago Sign up for Meduza’s daily newsletter A digest of Russia’s investigative reports and news analysis. If it matters, we summarize it. Email address meduza We ain’t done yetThe Russian authorities are now blocking Meduza. We’re ready for this, but we need your help. 8 days ago meduza Want to help sustain Meduza? Here’s how it works. 17 cards 10 months ago Meduza, working 24/7, always for our readersWe need your help like never before meduza Meduza is granting open access to all coverage of the war in Ukraine under a Creative Commons licenseYou can reprint our articles about the conflict in full — anywhere you like 4 days ago meduza No to War An editorial from Meduza 16 days ago news ‘The impulse to save lives is gone’The Soldiers’ Mothers of St. Petersburg helps desperate parents find their children. They say morale is at an all-time low. 2 days ago meduza Russia’s looming debt defaultWhat the 2022 financial crisis will mean for the country and its people 5 cards 2 days ago stories ‘When the blitzkrieg failed, he started to have doubts’The Kremlin’s invasion of Ukraine put some Russians at odds with their loved ones. For others, it brought them together. 2 days ago stories ‘I heard screams and thought it was important to record’Alexandra Kaluzhskikh, a young woman who secretly recorded audio of officers beating her at a Moscow police station, tells her story 3 days ago news Russia is the world’s top sanctions targetThere are now more sanctions against Russia than against Iran, Venezuela, Myanmar, and Cuba — combined 4 days ago stories ‘The poorer ones are already starving’Russian troops have controlled Kherson for a week. Here’s what life is like there now. 3 days ago news BlindsidedRussia’s top officials were caught off guard by Putin’s war in Ukraine. Many of them want to resign — but can’t. 3 days ago stories Leaving homeThese photos were taken through the windows of the trains taking Ukrainians to safety — and away from their loved ones 4 days ago stories ‘Just throw me into hell’How western Ukraine is preparing to defend itself. Meduza reports from Lviv. 4 days ago meduza Unlawful even by Russian standardsContrary to his claims, Vladimir Putin didn’t have ‘legal grounds’ for invading Ukraine 4 days ago news Russia’s looming financial collapse — a return to the 1990s or 1918? 28 minutes 5 days ago meduza Russia’s tricky opinion pollingSociologist Alexey Bessudnov shares five charts that help explain how to read the Kremlin’s survey data on support for the war in Ukraine 5 days ago stories March 6, in photosThousands arrested as anti-war protesters take to the streets in cities across Russia 6 days ago news The war: day elevenRussian soldiers open fire on civilians 6 days ago stories Between chaos and orderMeduza reports from the ground in Lviv, western Ukraine’s waypoint for hundreds of thousands of refugees 6 days ago stories Homes ablaze, schools in ruins, and utter catastrophePhotos from the war in Ukraine, where Russia’s military has turned life upside down 6 days ago stories From ‘frozen’ conflict to full-scale invasionHow has eight years of war changed Ukraine’s Donbas? Meduza asks human rights expert Varvara Pakhomenko. 7 days ago stories Fired for speaking outArtistic director Dmitry Volkostrelov publicly opposed Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. His anti-war stance cost him his job. 6 days ago news The day the news diedHere are all Russia’s independent media outlets banned, blocked, or shuttered in just the past few days 8 days ago In the past few days, Russia’s federal government has blocked or forced offline and off the airwaves virtually every re… Read more In the past few days, Russia’s federal government has blocked or forced offline and off the airwaves virtually every remaining independent news outlet in the country. This crackdown has reduced Russia’s free press to less than it was even in the late Soviet period. Here’s the current list of targeted media outlets, though the censor is still busy at work. stories ‘I’ll be depressed, and I’ll cut costs’Meduza readers on how Western sanctions — and Russia’s response measures — have changed their lives 8 days ago stories The war: day eightPhotos of the human toll of Russia’s attacks on Ukraine 8 days ago meduza Putin’s last standHow to lose a war simply by starting one 9 days ago stories The war: day sevenPhotos of intensifying Russian attacks on Ukrainian cities 9 days ago meduza You can’t silence usRussia’s president will lose, too, when the nation’s free press is gone 9 days ago stories A brief history of the Donbas War, in photosAmerican Brendan Hoffman captures eight years of life along the contact line in eastern Ukraine 10 days ago stories Why no mass protests in Russia? Sociologist Grigory Yudin demonstrated against the invasion and ended up in the hospital. He says we’re living in a new era. 11 days ago stories ‘We know the value of peace’Meduza looks back on 22 years of anti-war statements from Russia’s Vladimir Putin 12 days ago news ‘It’s not our war — it’s Putin’s war’What would Boris Nemtsov say about Russia’s invasion of Ukraine? We don’t have to wonder. 12 days ago stories ‘We told ourselves it wasn’t shelling’The early days of Russia’s invasion through the eyes of Odesa’s residents 10 days ago stories The war: day sixPhotos of Russia’s attacks on Ukraine in Kyiv and Kharkiv 11 days ago stories Tapping Article 275Russia’s Attorney General says providing ‘assistance to foreign states’ constitutes treason. What does this mean for anti-war advocates? 11 days ago news Day five of the warPhotographs from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine — negotiations take place as shelling continues 11 days ago stories Day four of the warPhotographs from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, as civilians flee and the fighting grows more intense 13 days ago meduza Meduza’s brief guide to accessing online resources blocked by the Russian authorities 14 days ago stories ‘I’ve seen the corpses, but I haven’t left Kyiv’The first few days of Russia’s war against Ukraine — through the eyes of the capital’s residents 13 days ago news Putin vs. Ukrainian history 24 minutes 14 days ago stories Stay hidden or get draftedHow the breakaway regions of eastern Ukraine are forcing local men into the military 14 days ago stories The 150,000 Ukrainians fleeing Russia’s war — in pictures 14 days ago stories Unreliable at bestWhat we know about Ukrainian and Russian casualties on day three of the invasion 14 days ago news Moscow on the warpathUpdates on major developments in Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine 15 days ago news ‘I’m panicking — where is my child?’Conscript soldiers are being sent to fight against Ukraine, their relatives say. Here’s what their families told Meduza. 15 days ago meduza ‘Fantasy is not history’Historian Victoria Smolkin assesses Putin’s claim that modern-day Ukraine is a ‘gift’ from the Bolsheviks 17 days ago news InvasionRussia pummels Ukraine with air strikes as troops march deep into the country, advancing into downtown Kyiv 17 days ago stories Traumatized by the newsLevada Center director Denis Volkov on why we shouldn’t expect a ‘Donbas consensus’ following Putin’s recognition of the ‘republics’ in eastern Ukraine 18 days ago news Soldiers and sanctionsRussia and the West make next moves as Ukraine braces for military escalation 17 days ago news ‘Many moments were not included’Russia’s Security Council session on recognition for eastern Ukraine’s separatists was billed as a live broadcast. Not only was it taped — it was edited. 18 days ago meduza Territorial claimsPutin has recognized the breakaway ‘republics’ in eastern Ukraine. But what does Moscow consider their ‘borders’? 19 days ago stories 60,000 and counting Russia scrambles to accommodate thousands as Donbas evacuations continue 19 days ago The Real Russia. Today.The strange case of Valery Solovey 23 days ago The Real Russia. Today.Russia’s options for ‘upping the pressure’ on Ukraine and the West 24 days ago The Real Russia. Today.Navalny returns to court 25 days ago The Real Russia. Today.The mother of two detained Chechen activists tells her family’s story a month ago stories Raising the stakesMeduza uncovers why the Russian State Duma asked Putin to recognize the breakaway ‘republics’ in eastern Ukraine 22 days ago news Mass evacuations raise fears of a major event looming in eastern Ukraine 22 days ago news Moscow’s package dealThe Russian Foreign Ministry’s response to Washington’s security proposals, in a nutshell 23 days ago meduza ‘It’s a chain reaction’Political scientist Andrey Kortunov on why a full-fledged Russian invasion of Ukraine is unlikely — but not impossible a month ago stories The professor and his propheciesKnown for peddling wild conspiracy theories, Valery Solovey is now wrapped up in a felony hate speech investigation 23 days ago meduza ‘A straw in the wind’ Meduza asks foreign policy experts to weigh in on the prospect of Russia recognizing the breakaway ‘republics’ in eastern Ukraine 24 days ago meduza In prison and on trialHere’s why Alexey Navalny is back in court and facing up to 15 more years behind bars 25 days ago About Code of conduct Advertise Privacy notes Cookies Facebook Twitter Instagram RSS © 2022 Meduza. All rights reserved 