Skip to main content Мы всегда на связи AboutМедуза по-русски The Real Russia, Today RU I’m with you, Meduza news Russia’s war against UkraineLive coverage of Moscow’s full-scale invasion Broadcasting now news 'The traitors will disappear on their own'Dmitry Peskov on the coming 'purification of Russian society' 2 hours ago stories What's going on in Russian-occupied Ukraine?Meduza sorts out the facts. 5 hours ago news ‘The purification of society will only strengthen the country’Meduza’s brief retelling of Putin’s darkest speech yet 2 hours ago stories ‘They don’t know Ukraine’Zelensky advisor Mykhailo Podolyak on Kyiv’s ‘cautious optimism’ about the negotiations with Russia 14 hours ago stories ‘This destroys my five years of hard work’Meduza’s readers on how Russia’s Instagram ban affects their everyday lives 2 days ago stories Three weeks inHow the invasion of Ukraine has turned deadly for reporters covering the war and upended Russian state journalism 15 hours ago stories ‘Z’How Russia transformed a letter of the Latin alphabet into the official (and ominous) symbol of its invasion of Ukraine 2 days ago stories Is Russia prepared for an economic crisis?Development expert Natalia Zubarevich on how sanctions will affect ordinary Russians — and what tools the government has to soften the blow 2 days ago Sign up for Meduza’s daily newsletter A digest of Russia’s investigative reports and news analysis. If it matters, we summarize it. Email address meduza We ain’t done yetThe Russian authorities are now blocking Meduza. We’re ready for this, but we need your help. 14 days ago meduza Want to help sustain Meduza? Here’s how it works. 17 cards a year ago Meduza, working 24/7, always for our readersWe need your help like never before meduza No to War An editorial from Meduza 22 days ago meduza Meduza is granting open access to all coverage of the war in Ukraine under a Creative Commons licenseYou can reprint our articles about the conflict in full — anywhere you like 10 days ago news ‘This will lead to our country’s collapse’Alexey Navalny's address to the Russian public as the state seeks new charges against him. 2 days ago stories A new symbol of Russia’s anti-war movementMeduza explains the origins of the white-blue-white flag. 2 days ago stories ‘Everyone knows they’re lying’ How Marina Ovsyannikova rebelled against Russian state television 2 days ago stories Behold Russia’s ‘liberation’Invading forces in Ukraine spent weeks conquering Volnovakha, inflicting damage so severe that the town no longer exists 4 days ago news Russian state TV editor interrupts live news broadcast with anti-war message 4 days ago During an evening news broadcast on March 14, Channel One editor Marina Ovsyannikova ran on stage with an anti-war bann… Read more During an evening news broadcast on March 14, Channel One editor Marina Ovsyannikova ran on stage with an anti-war banner that read, “No War. Stop the war! Don’t believe the propaganda! They’re lying to you here! Russians against war.” During the few seconds before the broadcast cut away, Ovsyannikova repeated the words, “No to war! Stop the war!” She was promptly arrested. The authorities say she will face misdemeanor charges for violating Russia’s new ban on “disinformation” about the invasion of Ukraine. In a prerecorded message shared on social media after the live-television incident, Ovsyannikova made the following remarks: “What is happening in Ukraine is a crime. And Russia is the aggressor here. And responsibility for this aggression rests on the conscience of a single man: Vladimir Putin. My father is Ukrainian. My mother is Russian. And they’ve never been enemies. And this necklace I’m wearing is a symbol of that fact that Russia must immediately end this fratricidal war. And our fraternal peoples will still be able to make peace. Unfortunately, I’ve spent many of the last few years working for Channel One, doing Kremlin propaganda, and I’m deeply ashamed of this. Ashamed that I allowed lies to come from the TV screen. Ashamed that I allowed the zombification of Russian people. We were silent in 2014 when all this had just started. We didn’t protest when the Kremlin poisoned Navalny. We just silently watched this anti-human regime at work. And now the whole world has turned its back on us. And the next 10 generations won’t wash away the stain of this fratricidal war. We Russians are thinking and intelligent people. It’s in our power alone to stop all this madness. Go protest. Don’t be afraid of anything. They can’t lock us all away.” Channel One screenshot stories ‘We’re on the Titanic, and it’s just hit the iceberg’Meduza’s Russian readers explain why they’re not leaving the country. 4 days ago stories ‘The TV is winning’Many Ukrainians now share a common experience: their relatives in Russia refuse to believe their accounts of the war. 4 days ago stories ‘They bury their neighbors wherever they can’A Ukrainian journalist describes life under Russian siege in Mariupol. 4 days ago stories ‘People from my country came to kill me’Every year, thousands of Russians move to Ukraine. Putin’s invasion has turned their lives upside down. 4 days ago meduza Definitely not ‘staged’False allegations about the maternity hospital airstrike in Mariupol, debunked 6 days ago stories From bad intel to worsePutin reportedly turns on FSB agency that botched Russia’s Ukraine prep 7 days ago stories Incriminating InstagramThe Russian authorities want to outlaw Meta as ‘extremist’. What does this mean for social media users in Russia? 7 days ago meduza Has Russia’s invasion stalled?Meduza tackles one of the biggest questions in Ukraine as the war enters its third week 6 days ago stories ‘A way to let my friends know I’m still alive’Vera Lytovchenko, a professional violinist, keeps playing for her neighbors — even as Russian bombs fall outside. 7 days ago stories Why did Putin destroy Russia's independent media?The Russian authorities explain. 7 days ago meduza Russia’s looming debt defaultWhat the 2022 financial crisis will mean for the country and its people 5 cards 7 days ago news ‘The war photos are fake — but the bioweapons are real’15 days into its invasion of Ukraine, Russia's information war continues at full throttle. 7 days ago news ‘The impulse to save lives is gone’The Soldiers’ Mothers of St. Petersburg helps desperate parents find their children. They say morale is at an all-time low. 7 days ago stories ‘When the blitzkrieg failed, he started to have doubts’The Kremlin’s invasion of Ukraine put some Russians at odds with their loved ones. For others, it brought them together. 8 days ago stories ‘I heard screams and thought it was important to record’Alexandra Kaluzhskikh, a young woman who secretly recorded audio of officers beating her at a Moscow police station, tells her story 8 days ago news Russia is the world’s top sanctions targetThere are now more sanctions against Russia than against Iran, Venezuela, Myanmar, and Cuba — combined 9 days ago stories ‘The poorer ones are already starving’Russian troops have controlled Kherson for a week. Here’s what life is like there now. 9 days ago news BlindsidedRussia’s top officials were caught off guard by Putin’s war in Ukraine. Many of them want to resign — but can’t. 9 days ago stories Leaving homeThese photos were taken through the windows of the trains taking Ukrainians to safety — and away from their loved ones 9 days ago stories ‘Just throw me into hell’How western Ukraine is preparing to defend itself. Meduza reports from Lviv. 10 days ago meduza Unlawful even by Russian standardsContrary to his claims, Vladimir Putin didn’t have ‘legal grounds’ for invading Ukraine 10 days ago news Russia’s looming financial collapse — a return to the 1990s or 1918? 28 minutes 11 days ago meduza Russia’s tricky opinion pollingSociologist Alexey Bessudnov shares five charts that help explain how to read the Kremlin’s survey data on support for the war in Ukraine 11 days ago stories March 6, in photosThousands arrested as anti-war protesters take to the streets in cities across Russia 12 days ago news The war: day elevenRussian soldiers open fire on civilians 11 days ago stories Between chaos and orderMeduza reports from the ground in Lviv, western Ukraine’s waypoint for hundreds of thousands of refugees 12 days ago stories Homes ablaze, schools in ruins, and utter catastrophePhotos from the war in Ukraine, where Russia’s military has turned life upside down 12 days ago stories From ‘frozen’ conflict to full-scale invasionHow has eight years of war changed Ukraine’s Donbas? Meduza asks human rights expert Varvara Pakhomenko. 13 days ago stories Fired for speaking outArtistic director Dmitry Volkostrelov publicly opposed Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. His anti-war stance cost him his job. 12 days ago news The day the news diedHere are all Russia’s independent media outlets banned, blocked, or shuttered in just the past few days 13 days ago In the past few days, Russia’s federal government has blocked or forced offline and off the airwaves virtually every re… Read more In the past few days, Russia’s federal government has blocked or forced offline and off the airwaves virtually every remaining independent news outlet in the country. This crackdown has reduced Russia’s free press to less than it was even in the late Soviet period. Here’s the current list of targeted media outlets, though the censor is still busy at work. stories ‘I’ll be depressed, and I’ll cut costs’Meduza readers on how Western sanctions — and Russia’s response measures — have changed their lives 14 days ago stories The war: day eightPhotos of the human toll of Russia’s attacks on Ukraine 14 days ago meduza Putin’s last standHow to lose a war simply by starting one 14 days ago stories The war: day sevenPhotos of intensifying Russian attacks on Ukrainian cities 15 days ago meduza You can’t silence usRussia’s president will lose, too, when the nation’s free press is gone 15 days ago stories A brief history of the Donbas War, in photosAmerican Brendan Hoffman captures eight years of life along the contact line in eastern Ukraine 15 days ago stories Why no mass protests in Russia? Sociologist Grigory Yudin demonstrated against the invasion and ended up in the hospital. He says we’re living in a new era. 16 days ago stories ‘We know the value of peace’Meduza looks back on 22 years of anti-war statements from Russia’s Vladimir Putin 17 days ago news ‘It’s not our war — it’s Putin’s war’What would Boris Nemtsov say about Russia’s invasion of Ukraine? We don’t have to wonder. 18 days ago stories ‘We told ourselves it wasn’t shelling’The early days of Russia’s invasion through the eyes of Odesa’s residents 16 days ago stories The war: day sixPhotos of Russia’s attacks on Ukraine in Kyiv and Kharkiv 16 days ago stories Tapping Article 275Russia’s Attorney General says providing ‘assistance to foreign states’ constitutes treason. What does this mean for anti-war advocates? 16 days ago news Day five of the warPhotographs from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine — negotiations take place as shelling continues 17 days ago stories Day four of the warPhotographs from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, as civilians flee and the fighting grows more intense 18 days ago meduza Meduza’s brief guide to accessing online resources blocked by the Russian authorities 20 days ago stories ‘I’ve seen the corpses, but I haven’t left Kyiv’The first few days of Russia’s war against Ukraine — through the eyes of the capital’s residents 19 days ago news Putin vs. Ukrainian history 24 minutes 20 days ago stories Stay hidden or get draftedHow the breakaway regions of eastern Ukraine are forcing local men into the military 20 days ago stories The 150,000 Ukrainians fleeing Russia’s war — in pictures 20 days ago stories Unreliable at bestWhat we know about Ukrainian and Russian casualties on day three of the invasion 20 days ago news Moscow on the warpathUpdates on major developments in Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine 21 days ago news ‘I’m panicking — where is my child?’Conscript soldiers are being sent to fight against Ukraine, their relatives say. Here’s what their families told Meduza. 21 days ago meduza ‘Fantasy is not history’Historian Victoria Smolkin assesses Putin’s claim that modern-day Ukraine is a ‘gift’ from the Bolsheviks 22 days ago news InvasionRussia pummels Ukraine with air strikes as troops march deep into the country, advancing into downtown Kyiv 22 days ago stories Traumatized by the newsLevada Center director Denis Volkov on why we shouldn’t expect a ‘Donbas consensus’ following Putin’s recognition of the ‘republics’ in eastern Ukraine 24 days ago news Soldiers and sanctionsRussia and the West make next moves as Ukraine braces for military escalation 23 days ago news ‘Many moments were not included’Russia’s Security Council session on recognition for eastern Ukraine’s separatists was billed as a live broadcast. Not only was it taped — it was edited. 24 days ago meduza Territorial claimsPutin has recognized the breakaway ‘republics’ in eastern Ukraine. But what does Moscow consider their ‘borders’? 25 days ago stories 60,000 and counting Russia scrambles to accommodate thousands as Donbas evacuations continue 25 days ago The Real Russia. Today.The strange case of Valery Solovey a month ago The Real Russia. Today.Russia’s options for ‘upping the pressure’ on Ukraine and the West a month ago The Real Russia. Today.Navalny returns to court a month ago The Real Russia. Today.The mother of two detained Chechen activists tells her family’s story a month ago stories Raising the stakesMeduza uncovers why the Russian State Duma asked Putin to recognize the breakaway ‘republics’ in eastern Ukraine a month ago news Mass evacuations raise fears of a major event looming in eastern Ukraine a month ago news Moscow’s package dealThe Russian Foreign Ministry’s response to Washington’s security proposals, in a nutshell a month ago About Code of conduct Advertise Privacy notes Cookies Facebook Twitter Instagram RSS © 2022 Meduza. All rights reserved 